Draft requirements document for general purpose Continuous Benchmarking framework (#1)
conbench/conbench: doc/REQUIREMENTS.md

* Revisions of the codebase (changes through time)
* Compilers or compiler flags on the same machine
* Dependencies versions (e.g. OpenBLAS vs. Intel MKL)
* Machine / hardware configuration (e.g. CPU type or architecture)

Note that results collected from different machines may be stored in the same
database.

### Benchmark result collection

We assume that developers will continue to author benchmarks using the
preferred microbenchmark or macrobenchmark support libraries for their
programming language.

For each kind of benchmarking library, we propose to write a "plugin" to enable
this project to

* Execute the benchmarks
* Extract and store the results

Some things to keep in mind:

* Not all benchmarks are time-based. Other metrics include throughput
  (e.g. bytes-per-second) or memory use. We should probably retain the
  flexibility to track new kinds of metrics in the future.
* A single benchmark run may produce more than one kind of result measurement,
  such as both time and peak memory use.
* For each kind of measurement, we should know whether "higher" or "lower" is
  better.

One question to be explored is benchmarks that output results from multiple

> runs rather than an average or median result. The benchmark may return all of

Reviewer: Definitely should keep the timings from each result, and their order. Many use cases might require query to be call only once, then users will be interested in the timing of the first run of a query. Average or median will be not relevant for them. Having all run timings we can also compare the cost of initial first run of a query, and eventually work out to improve it.

or C++ library toolchain dependencies)

### Build Configuration and Automation

Conbench users must do an initial setup / configuration to instruct Conbench
how to do a number of things:

* The type of code repository and its location. Conbench should probably drive
  the codebase clone and checkout process to avoid user errors and enhance
  reproducibility
* The parameters for each benchmark run to be performed for a revision of the
  codebase. Such parameters may include: environment variables
  (e.g. `CXX=clang-9`), build system configuration options, compiler flags,
  library dependency versions, and other details.
* The template script to invoke to build the project and any benchmark
  executables given a set of configuration parameters

Some kind of human-readable YAML-based configuration is likely called
for. Templatized build scripts could use Jinja2 syntax or some other well-known
template syntax for parameters that vary across different benchmark runs.

### Tooling for patch validation

It would be useful to have an easy-to-use command line tool to assist
developers with comparing the performance of a set of benchmarks between two

> commits, such as the master branch versus a feature branch. Such feedback could

Reviewer 2: Also for running on local (uncommitted) changes?

Author: Yes, I'll amend to say this

Reviewer 3: Just a novel case. Two independent PRs are in review, each of them tested okay, but combined together they break the performance. Merge time checking should block the second patch. But for a hot project with many merges, plus indeterminate PR review time, it may be not easy to locate the buggy first patch.

# Conbench: Continuous Benchmarking (CB) Framework Requirements

## Context

Continuous Integration (CI) and Continuous Delivery (CD) tools have become
essential to modern software development workflows. These apply systematic
rigor to functional testing, code coverage, packaging, and deployment
throughout the lifecycle of a project.

Tools for "continuous benchmarking" (CB) or performance testing are not nearly
so mature. This has numerous negative consequences:

* Developers use benchmarks infrequently to determine whether to accept

>   patches. Application performance regressions are often identified long after

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  patches. 
  * Application performance regressions are often identified long after
```

  the offending patch or patches were merged, such as when users install a
  newly released package and find that some production process grew slower or
  more resource intensive.

> * The performance of code is seldom tracked over time.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* The performance metrics of a codebase are seldom tracked over time.
```

* The impact of dependency upgrades or operating system changes (e.g. Linux
  kernel upgrades) often go unnoticed.
* Developers are less motivated to write "defensive" benchmarks to prevent
  their performance optimization effort from being "undone" by performance
  regressions introduced by subsequent work.

> As such, we propose a general purpose, language-agnostic "continuous

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
To address these negative consequences, we propose a general purpose, language-agnostic "continuous
```

benchmarking" framework that can collect language-dependent benchmark data and
operationalize that data to more naturally incorporate performance data into
the software development workflow.

## Non-Goals

Before getting into features and other requirements, this section lists some

> things that this project is **not** going to do, at least at this stage.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
things that this project is **not** going to do, at least at this initial stage.
```

> * Replace language-specific benchmark libraries for **authoring**

Reviewer 5: No. It's saying that this project is not going to replace Google Benchmark for _writing_ benchmarks. Conbench will be able to ingest GBench results.

> * Replace language-specific benchmark libraries for **authoring**

Reviewer 6: ah.. ok. Thanks @jrhemstad for the clarification.

  benchmarks. This includes projects like [Google Benchmark][1] for C/C++,
  [JMH][2] for the JVM, [criterion][3] for Rust, etc.

## Features and Other Requirements

Some areas of development for this framework include the following areas:

> * Result database

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* Result database including every commit
```

Reviewer 7: Allowing decoupling here may help. Maybe look at GH Pipelines/Tasks or other CI frameworks for how they allow user-defined triggers?

Author: Could you explain what you mean by "decoupling"?

Reviewer 7: I may be overreading into "commit" as "git commit", which I'm pushing back on. I mean decoupling version control activity from a specify CI-trigger policy by (a) having an explicit trigger-policy mapping layer with (b) sane default/common policies mapping to common patterns.

Background: Different projects -- maybe even developers - have different practices & policies on what they consider a CI-triggering unit. It can be merges to particular branches, the creation of branches, the creation of PRs, etc.  Especially when there may be costs attached, they may even be user-guided, such as depending on whether a commit / branch has explicit labels like "doit" or "skipit" . 

Some examples:

- A developer not wanting to trigger a run while working on a private branch
- When a new commit lands on a PR, should the old job be canceled or not? When tests are heavy, that may save a lot of time.
- Different branches may have different rules. Maybe deep benchmarking on happens on master merges or someone tagging a commit.

Author: Benchmark triggering rules seems like a wholly unrelated concern to me. I'm not sure this project should be prescriptive about this. 

The result database needs to identify results with the revision(s) of the codebase(s) being tested. Otherwise you may not be able to attribute changes in performance to a a particular delta/commit to a codebase. This framework's intended use case is for benchmarking code performance that involves a single codebase (so you can bisect which commit caused performance regressions), but it is probably possible to benchmark multi-repo projects where the "identifier" is a point in time (in other words, "use the latest commit for all projects as of a point in time").

Reviewer 8: Perhaps the concern is that the wording `Result database including every commit` is unclear. Maybe something like `Result database indexed by commit or other revision identifier` would be more clear?

* Benchmark result collection
* Hardware information collection
* Software configuration collection
* Build Configuration and Automation
* Tooling for patch validation
* API for remote reporting
* Front end for exploration and visualization

### Result database

This project requires a database to store and query the data produced by
executing benchmarks. Some considerations for the database:

* Results must be associated with a deterministic revision of a codebase (for

>   example, a git hash, but we do not need to only work with git)

Reviewer 9: As a detail I would also track the time associated with a commit; as otherwise getting some graphs of performamce vs  "time" will be tough without specific version control integration.

* Data may be generated by different machine environments, operating systems,
  and other software configurations.
* A particular machine may generate multiple sets of results for different
  build configurations. For example, using different compilers (like clang
  versus gcc) or different compiler flags (like with or without SIMD compiler
  extensions).
* Data may be commingled from different underlying benchmark frameworks

> Users of Conbench may wish to examine benchmark results across many

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Users of **Conbench** may wish to examine benchmark results across many
```

different axes of comparison:

* Revisions of the codebase (changes through time)
* Compilers or compiler flags on the same machine
* Dependencies versions (e.g. OpenBLAS vs. Intel MKL)
* Machine / hardware configuration (e.g. CPU type or architecture)

Note that results collected from different machines may be stored in the same
database.

### Benchmark result collection

We assume that developers will continue to author benchmarks using the
preferred microbenchmark or macrobenchmark support libraries for their
programming language.

For each kind of benchmarking library, we propose to write a "plugin" to enable

> this project to

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
**Conbench** to:
```

* Execute the benchmarks
* Extract and store the results

Some things to keep in mind:

* Not all benchmarks are time-based. Other metrics include throughput
  (e.g. bytes-per-second) or memory use. We should probably retain the
  flexibility to track new kinds of metrics in the future.
* A single benchmark run may produce more than one kind of result measurement,
  such as both time and peak memory use.
* A benchmark may emit multiple results from a single run rather than the
  average or median results. This is important to measure variability across
  runs as well as differences between the first execution and subsequent
  executions (e.g. caching or other effects). Thus we should be able to store
  multiple measurements for the same metric as the output of a single benchmark
  run.

> * For each kind of measurement, we should know whether "higher" or "lower" is

Reviewer 10: For latency measurement (or other discrete result sets) it would be good to support histograms. Comparing histograms is a little more complex, but storing the data is very valuable.

Reviewer 9: IIUC this document is just the "storing" part, or are we also talking about visualisation ?

Author: Visualization would be covered in the "front end" section below. Having good visualizations seems important to help make benchmark-informed decisions

Reviewer 7: Being opinionated about supporting a few first-class metric types will likely help downstream tooling & workflow stream lining, and quickly lead to stronger generalization...

For us: 
* Context: hot/cold
* Metrics: Wall clock, Roofline model metrics around compute+IO utilization (CPU/GPU compute, heap min/max/avg, IO transfers at each hop like CPU<>GPU)

Author: As soon as we have the ability to collect metrics, adding support for more metric types and metadata about them should be straightforward if we've done things properly.

  better.

### Hardware information collection

When executing the benchmarks on a machine, we should collect as detailed
information as possible about the machine and store this in a well-structured
schema:

* CPU identifier and characteristics (manufacturer, architecture, clock speed,
  L1/L2/L3 cache sizes, and so forth)
* Installed RAM

> * GPU information (including multi-GPU configurations)

Reviewer 11: Are we also considering multiple CPU/GPUs in multiple machines in distributed environment?

Author: Yes, if a machine has multiple GPUs then the framework should query and store their attributes. Same for multi-CPU machines (it isn't clear in the doc about multi-CPU machines, I will note that in the next revision)

Reviewer 4: Perhaps a metadata field to identify cloud provider for this hardware.

Reviewer 12: I would love to see support for a cluster of machines not just a single machine.  I don't see any specific use cases listed in the docs, but it feels very much like you have been thinking mostly about cases that fit on a single VM/box.  

What happens if I want to benchmark a web service with a database back end?  Do I have to make sure everything can run in a single VM?  That might not match production very well, where there is typically a separate host for the DB from the web servers.  Or distributed computing like etcd, Spark, Kafka, ...  If those are not goals for this framework that is fine, but it would be good to call it out as not covered.  If they are goals, then your metadata needs to be expanded to cover the interconnect between the nodes and roles for each of the nodes.

Author: @revans2 I think that the hardware profile associated with a benchmark run should be general enough to include multiple machines. So rather than being a single machine let's call it a "hardware configuration". I'll update the document to account for this possibility

Reviewer 7: To be concrete about GPU, most of what we see in practice as mattering:

* Host OS version, file system
* Virtualization: Containerized or not, including basic container settings like file systems
* Host/container GPU driver version
* Specific version dependencies (rapids/CUDA/... libs, numba, blazing, arrow, python/asyncio, ...)
* GPU family & model
* Cloud vendor
* A few GPU expected stats: # GPUs, interconnect, # units of diff type (FP16, ...), memory of diff types

Reviewer 13: I would be cautious about benchmarking a distributed environment. It’s very difficult to replicate network conditions and you can end up with too many uncontrollable variables that could affect benchmark results. There are already specs such as OpenTracing, for collecting information in those environments.

Reviewer: Regarding memory usage tracking. It should be investigated whether it incurs a penatly in computing time of queries, and if so, then memory should be measured in a separate benchmark run. So time measures won't be affected by a memory tracking routines.

Author: As soon as we have a basic framework for collecting and storing configuration information, it will be easy to add additional data as required by different use cases. It's not our job to take responsibility for the interpretability of results collected in a multi-node environment, only to collect and store the data.

### Software configuration collection

A benchmark run may expose dependency version numbers and other configuration
information. This includes such things as:

* The operating system type and version (this includes the Linux kernel
  version). This is important as operating system updates in recent times have

>   included CPU security vulnerability mitigations that affect performance.

Reviewer 14: I would also be interested in things like driver versions, firmware + microcode versions / revisions, and other lower level software information. Unsure if we'd want to capture that as hardware or software information.

Reviewer 14: It would also be good to know if options like hyperthreading, or virtualization features are turned on or off as they can non-trivially impact performance as well.

Author: I don't think the list of things here needs to be exhaustive at this point. I would suggest opening GH issues about collecting and storing each type of system info you'd like to track

* Compiler type and version. For example, a machine may report both gcc 4.8 and
  gcc 8 results
* Installed dependency versions (both build-time and run-time dependencies)

Some of this data collection will have to be provided by common code (for
example, operating system level data) while other data will be provided by
programming language-specific plugins (e.g. reporting installed Python packages
or C++ library toolchain dependencies)

### Build Configuration and Automation

Conbench users must do an initial setup / configuration to instruct Conbench
how to do a number of things:

* The type of code repository and its location. Conbench should probably drive
  the codebase clone and checkout process to avoid user errors and enhance

>   reproducibility

Reviewer 15: Conbench orchestrating and driving the process with this much control is something we would like to avoid as much as possible. This is a problem we ran into with ASV; it also wants to control the entire build process from checkout, to building, to the environment. This became a massive blocker, and ultimately a reason why we have avoided using the ASV suite. I'm not saying this feature is bad, but I think the users should be given more freedom around this.

If we have CI/CD tools that are already capable of building and testing code the way we want it, and we want to integrate Conbench into our CI/CD pipeline, we don't necessarily want Conbench to do the building, we already have the infrastructure in place that supports building and running tests. If we want to add benchmarks to this process, then we wouldn't want to have that build overhead cost or have Conbench controlling the environment. While I think this feature is nice if you were to use it as a standalone tool, I also believe, through experience, that this can severely limit its integration capabilities if its the only option a user has.

I think it would be fantastic if we could just tell conbench to run this script or run this gbench command and generate the needed results from there. No need to checkout code, no need to build the code; CI/CD will take care of that, lets hand off the rest of the work to the CB tool.

Author: > Conbench orchestrating and driving the process with this much control is something we would like to avoid as much as possible.

Just because it _can_ do this, does not mean that it _must_. I'll revise the document to be clear that the tool should not force you to let it manage the code checkout. You should be able to run the benchmark suite, collect the data, and commit it to the result database with a revision identifier that you provide through the CLI. E.g.

```
conbench run --config=bench/config.yml --revision="2020-03-27" ...
```

or similar.

That being said, to have the feature of being able to automate building and benchmarking a range of commits is very useful when you need it.

Reviewer 16: > Just because it _can_ do this, does not mean that it _must_. I'll revise the document to be clear that the tool should not force you to let it manage the code checkout. You should be able to run the benchmark suite, collect the data, and commit it to the result database with a revision identifier that you provide through the CLI. E.g.

Agreed, for our use case with RAPIDS we have the PR testing environment up and running so we want to take advantage of the environment when it is done with unit tests to optionally run benchmarks. This way we don't have to go through spinning up a new node and environment to get the results we need. It also allows us to have the unit tests passing as a potential requirement before running more "costly" benchmarks.

When not doing PR tests, we would like to run nightly tests so these would be standalone and make use of the tool's proposed features. 

We appreciate the effort here @wesm and team, we've been building our own mashup of gtests, pytest, and ASV for RAPIDS. It's still WIP but we're using ASV mostly for a frontend. The benchmarks are run nightly through CI (PR tests are still WIP) and then we take the results and translate them into ASV JSON results for display. It also allows us to get around some of the fixed commit hash range requirements of ASV where the dev/master branches are disconnected with PRs while in development, but we can still use the results from dev/master to help spot regressions. We're still a bit out on this, but my goal is to have my team working on this for our 0.14 release and will be continuing to follow developments here to see how we can contribute and adopt.

* The parameters for each benchmark run to be performed for a revision of the
  codebase. Such parameters may include: environment variables
  (e.g. `CXX=clang-9`), build system configuration options, compiler flags,
  library dependency versions, and other details.
* The template script to invoke to build the project and any benchmark
  executables given a set of configuration parameters

> Some kind of human-readable YAML-based configuration is likely called

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Some kind of human-readable YAML-based configuration is likely needed.
```

> for. Templatized build scripts could use Jinja2 syntax or some other well-known

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Templatized build scripts could use Jinja2 syntax or some other well-known
```

> template syntax for parameters that vary across different benchmark runs.

Reviewer 7: I advocate opinionated out-of-the-box support for at least 1 common and easy-to-use task runner. We happen to like Github Actions b/c git+github+CI integration.

Author: That seems orthogonal to the development of the framework, but it would make sense for the project to provide an example GitHub Actions setup for running things. Though benchmarks run in public CI services are next to useless.

Reviewer 7: It's mostly orthogonal, but thinking through the story bolsters adoption. (And yep, that's how we end up doing: azure github actions -> packer GPU AMI jobs = serverless GPU CI w/ little hassle).

Author: I'm still unsure about this. Benchmarking in CI services in my opinion is an anti-pattern so I don't feel comfortable including it in the bootstrapping phase of getting the project off the ground.

### Tooling for patch validation

It would be useful to have an easy-to-use command line interface (CLI) tool to
assist developers with comparing the performance of a set of benchmarks between
two commits, such as the master branch versus a feature branch. Such feedback
could be created by automated processes to give feedback on GitHub pull
requests to validate that a patch does not cause performance regressions.

As special cases, this CLI tool should also support comparing local changes
versus a branch (e.g. master), or checking the performance after one or more
branches are merged with master.

### API for remote reporting

Some users may wish to store benchmark results locally, whereas others may wish
to report results from "satellite" machines into a central result server. It
would make sense, therefore, to have a simple REST-type API server
implementation that is able to receive results and write them to its local
database.

Another possibility for an API for remote reporting is to write results to a

> remote SQL server (e.g. PostgreSQL). This will be to determined.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
remote SQL server (e.g. PostgreSQL). Now, this support is marked "to be determined".
```
